---
title: 'Reply to "TypeScript isn''t helping anyone." Blogging as someone with inexperience? Don''t waste my time.'
date: 2021-09-01T00:03:46-05:00
draft: true
---

## Reply to "TypeScript isn't helping anyone." Blogging as someone with inexperience? Don't waste my time.

I read the Medium article titled "TypeScript isn't helping anyone." The title is what got to me. There are a plethora of clickbait articles with absolute statements here on Medium. I figured it was satire. So I spent the time to read it and was left wondering if the author even understands static-type systems or at least the supposed benefits. It reads like yet another article by a cocky boot camp graduate that only knows JavaScript and thinks they know everything; I would know I teach a coding boot camp part-time. The article is the very definition of the Dunning-Kruger effect. So the following is how the article COULD HAVE been written had the author taken time to formulate a decent and coherent article about when to and not to use TypeScript. I'll also be addressing several problem statements in that previously referred article. So let's start with the title.
TypeScript isn't always helpful.
The Definition
TypeScript is a strongly typed programming language that builds on JavaScript, giving you better tooling at any scale.

TypeScript.org Typescript is a superset of JavaScript. It essentially adds static types to JavaScript (at compile-time, not runtime). The compiler checks for type errors at compile-time then translates the code to the target JavaScript version to run. The 2020 State of JS showed that 78% of developers used TypeScript. TypeScript isn't the first to attempt to solve this problem; CoffeeScript came first. TypeScript is easier to adopt as one can simply rename their JS files to TS and gradually add types as they go. The Assumption JavaScript is dynamically typed, therefore it is bad. That's the assumption. This isn't quite the case. Historically, statically typed languages have had inflexible type systems and very slow compile times. Dynamic typing was a relief for quickly testing out changes and being able to code more flexibly. Dynamic typing means types may change at runtime. JavaScript in particular does have some weird behaviors with truthiness but that is well known. We have code linters, like light-weight type checkers, Variables don't have inherent types. Dynamic typing has drawbacks as well. We can pass in any number of arguments of any type into a function. In a large codebase, with presumably more complex functions, I'd have no idea what a particular function needs or how to call it appropriately, not without writing JS doc documentation, but comments need to be updated AND don't force me to use the function properly. Dynamic typing sacrifices safety for speed of development. There are trade-offs. Finding The Problem Yet that same junior developer finds online resources split between JS and TS and (seemingly) can't differentiate, causing problems.
The Secret Developer That quote highlights a team that isn't supporting their junior developer to understand the difference between TypeScript and JavaScript. We shouldn't dumb down code to appeal to junior developers. Instead, we should smarten our processes and support them. I remember being a junior developer and feeling lost. I didn't expect tools to be dumbed down to my level but aspired to grok everything; given enough time. The Limitations TypeScript is far from a panacea. It requires yet another build step. TypeScript also is simply a compile-time abstraction. All those types don't exist at runtime like in languages such as Java or C#. TypeScript won't fix poorly written code or prevent other classes of bugs. TypeScript is also pretty far from being purely functional like ELM and Purescript. Also, if the libraries you're using don't have TypeScript type definitions (or poor ones) then you'll have to work around compiler errors or write the definitions yourself. The Real Decision-Making Process Let me put this out there. Humans are the ones that write computer code. They are the ones that make mistakes. You'll need to know your team, of course as well as the project.
The Secret Developer As The Secret Developer said, yes humans are the ones that make mistakes, hence why static typing is extremely useful at scale. Even the most basic of mistakes can be made when working on a huge codebase. Ever spot a spelling or grammar error in a novel? What about a plot hole? They're not so easy to find in a 50,000-word novel. They're even more difficult to spot in a 500,000 LOC application that has dozens of authors and is changing by the hour! Everyone else is doing it. We need something to catch our buggy code (protip: think about tests?). Company X is using it (are you kidding me? This is an argument?). Your solution to a disparate set of problems is to convert a weakly typed language into a strongly typed variant? If you think this without looking at other options can I have a bit of what you're drinking?
The Secret Developer Everyone else is doing it Yes, that isn't a great justification by itself but does indicate a trend. Maybe there is a reason "everyone else is doing it.". Unless the author thinks we should keep coding web pages like it is 1993. We need to catch bugs Yes, tests are helpful but tests require time to type and their quality is 100% dependent on those who write them. Test validate the implementation; Type checking validates the usage Again the author doesn't understand the benefits or at least stated benefits of static typing. Is the team going to spend hundreds of developer hours just writing tests to check that the types are correct and the number of parameters passed correctly? That sounds a bit insane and error-prone to me. Groovy bit me in the butt once since it doesn't validate the number of arguments passed at compile-time. I had to manually find all definitions of a method. Just add types and they are automatically checked! Much of the time the types are just inferred so you get it for free. Plus you get free documentation, auto-complete, better refactoring, etc. … That said, TypeScript won't catch all those bugs. Another TypeScript pros and cons article mentions that there isn't any proof that static typing reduces bugs, while I disagree, I think it is a good discussion to have. Weakly-Typed to Strongly-Typed Variant Actually, it is dynamically typed to statically typed. Strong / Weak typing isn't well defined. Yes, static typing IS a great solution to a "disparate set of problems", and engineers, much smarter than him or I, think so and built Typescript. After working on a larger-scale project it becomes apparent. So WHAT are the factors? Project Size Tooling support Team adoption Domain Logic in JavaScript Refactoring ability Documentation
Much of my 8-year career has been in CMS or content management system development. Enterprise CMS's usually use server-side rendering. Everything is component-based with very little JavaScript used. It really wouldn't be all that helpful to add TypeScript for simple components. Refactoring 100 lines of code that will never be re-used isn't all that difficult. I'm not writing complex domain logic and defining models in JavaScript either. In this case, TypeScript is more of a burden than a blessing.
If I'm building a simple app, like my Tic-Tac-Chat application, then TypeScript isn't really necessary.
If you are using libraries and tools without good TypeScript support then that may be a reason to not choose TypeScript.
TypeScript can help with ORMs and mapping static types from backends or database systems.
Another solution may be to move some of the business logic and domain logic to backend languages that are better-suited and likely better performing.
So the right answer is "it depends". TypeScript DOES help many developers but that doesn't mean everyone needs to use it for everything. It adds complexity to the build system, the team needs to adopt it, library support isn't 100% and unfortunately, versioning can become a pain with matching TypeScript definitions and library versions.
Conclusion
TypeScript has helped a ton of teams at scale but it is far from a panacea. Blindingly jumping on the TypeScript wagon may not be the best choice. TypeScript, like JavaScript, has warts of its own. TypeScript and static-typing solve specific problems which come with costs. I'd suggest starting projects with vanilla JavaScript and then possibly gradually integrating TypeScript later on. I personally think that Purescript is a better candidate than TypeScript as it is a lot more strict and purely functional. Purescript can also be compiled to Go and C++ as well.
I wrote this article to highlight how opinion articles can be written without making absolute and ridiculous statements. I tire of all the pseudo-intellectuals on Medium and other sites. They're making ridiculous claims like "TypeScript isn't helping anyone" without actually showing experience on the topic of discussion I want to thank The Secret Developer for challenging me to write my own article. I've been meaning to write in 2022 anyways.
I've been writing code for 15+ years, 8+ years professionally. I still have a long way to go on my developer journey and will continue to share my thoughts, opinions, and tidbits as I progress.
Please stay tuned for more articles from me.
